:orphan:

.. _data_extract_guidance:

Guidance for PHN and provider organisations analysing PMHC MDS data extracts
============================================================================

Introduction
------------

The Department of Health, Disability and Ageing (DoHDA) commissioned the 
implementation of the Primary Mental Health Care Minimum Dataset (PMHC MDS) 
in 2016 to support Primary Health Networks (PHNs) in collecting data related 
to the range of mental health services that are funded by DoHDA and 
commissioned by the PHNs.

Data specifications, including data model diagrams are available at https://docs.pmhc-mds.com/data-specifications.html.

This document provides guidance for data analysts at PHNs or their provider 
organisations using data that they have extracted from the PMHC MDS using 
the PMHC MDS’s Data Extract functionality as documented at 
https://docs.pmhc-mds.com/projects/user-documentation/en/latest/data-extract.html. 

It is intended that data analysts will acquaint themselves with the 
data specifications before reading this guidance.

Provider Organisations
----------------------

Central to the PMHC MDS is the concept of a Provider Organisation (PO). As 
defined in the Key Concepts section of the data specification at 
https://docs.pmhc-mds.com/projects/data-specification/en/latest/data-model-and-specifications.html#provider-organisation, 
the PO is the business entity the PHN has commissioned to provide the 
service. The rules for POs in the PMHC MDS include some atypical data 
design features that are not evident from the data model diagram but are 
important for producing accurate results.

The importance of Organisation Path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each PHN in the PMHC MDS has a registered key. This is set by DoHDA. Each 
PO in the PMHC MDS also has a key, which is set by the PHN. In addition, each 
PO has an Organisation Path. This is a composite key made up of the PHN key and 
the key for the specific PO. The PO Organisation Path is used as a foreign 
key for all tables linked to the Provider Organisation table.

Keys across PHNs are unique at the PO level. To ensure that spurious joins are 
not made, the primary key for tables that join directly, or indirectly to a PO, 
is a *composite key comprising Organisation Path and entity (Client, Episode etc) 
Key*, not the entity key alone.

Organisation Path and Client Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As described above, *client identifiers are unique to POs*. In effect this 
means that a single human being interacting with two POs will have two 
identifiers, one for each PO. This is because client identifiers are defined 
either by the POs or in some cases their commissioning PHN. 

An important corollary is that it is possible for the *same client identifier 
to refer to different human beings at different POs*.

Organisation Path and Episodes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The second notable PO related feature is that the PMHC MDS requires all services 
delivered in a single Episode to be delivered by the same PO. As for client 
identifiers, episode identifiers are generated by POs (or potentially PHNs). 
Also, as for client identifiers, there is a possibility that different POs will 
apply the same value for unrelated episode keys, thus the composite key for the 
Episode table is Organisation Path and Episode Key.

Organisation Path and other records
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As above, throughout the model, Organisation Path is part of the composite key 
on all tables subordinate to the Provider Organisation table. Therefore any 
data analysis on exported tables needs to utilise the composite key. 

The relationship between Intakes and Episodes
---------------------------------------------

The PMHC MDS model has a unique process for representing patient interactions 
with assessment (**Intake**) and treatment (**Episode**) organisations.

A typical intake process involves the client contacting a PHN Intake team 
(e.g. a phone service) that undertakes triage, including an IAR-DST. The Intake 
team will recommend a subsequent course of action - almost always a referral 
to a different organisation or organisations for further assistance or treatment, 
but it is possible to make no referral.

To minimise confusion of the term “referral”, the PMHC MDS endeavours to use 
the term dispatch to mean the passing of a client to another organisation. 
Note that it is possible to simultaneously dispatch to more than one organisation. 
It is also possible that the dispatch “fails” in the sense that for whatever 
reason the referred-to organisation does not accept the client; in this 
situation the failed dispatch is not necessarily deleted, but a replacement 
dispatch can be initiated as well.

The intake record for referrals to an MDS reporting entity are supposed to 
nclude the organisation path of these entities). When an intake team dispatches a 
client to an MDS-reporting entity it must pass its own organisation path and the 
key assigned for the intake to the referred-to (treatment) organisation in 
addition to any clinical details. At the point where the treatment organisation 
“accepts” the dispatch it should open its own case, which in turn should 
ultimately be recorded in a PMHC MDS **Episode** record. The treatment organisation 
should also record an **Intake Episode** record, the entire purpose of which is to 
link the treatment organisation’s **Episode** record with the intake team’s **Intake** 
record. This link is necessary because different organisations are responsible 
for the intake and the treatment, and therefore, the Intake and Episode records 
will often be submitted by different agents. Furthermore, they may be submitted 
at different times and not in the sequence the events occurred (i.e. the 
treatment organisation can submit Episode records before the intake team submits 
the corresponding Intake record).
